# salty-salamanders
This repository contains all data (2015-2024) from _Breeding by The Sea: Coastal Vernal Pools in Acadia National Park as Breeding Habitat for Spotted Salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)_, a long-term monitoring project that is focused on a population of Spotted Salamanders that breeds on an exposed, rocky headland by the Atlantic Ocean.

This population is unique because while Spotted Salamanders typically breed in woodland vernal pools (Petranka 2010), this population breeds in a series of freshwater pools in a granite headland, so close to the ocean that the pools are occasionally flushed with full-strength seawater during stochastic storm events. Because Spotted Salamanders are amphibians with semi-permeable skin and are sensitive to osmoregulatory imbalance, this population’s exposure to higher salinity concentrations during the breeding season raises questions about their choice of breeding site, the survivorship of their offspring, and the potential existence of adaptations within this population to a more saline environment.

This project was initiated by Dr. Stephen Ressel in 2015 with efforts to quantify the environmental salinities that these salamanders were experiencing during the breeding season. The study site consists of 16 different breeding pools in which salamanders have been observed over the years, varying in size and depth as well as proximity to both the forest and the ocean. Preliminary findings about the salinity characteristics of these breeding pools were recently published in the regional journal Northeastern Naturalist (Ressel et al. 2023, full citation below).

## References
- Stephen J. Ressel, Emma E. Damm, Wriley Hodge, Georgia Q. Lattig, Tess Moore, Westly Reason, Judith A. Tunstad, Jasper White, "Salinity Characteristics of Rocky Cliff Pools Used as Breeding Habitat by Spotted Salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)," Northeastern Naturalist, 30(2), 212-225, (29 June 2023)
- Petranka, James W. “Salamanders of the United States and Canada” (2010). Smithsonian Books.
